docs/05. Strategies.md, before:

# Strategies

In this section, you will learn:

* What are strategies
* How to use built-in strategies
* Creating custom strategies

## What are strategies?

A strategy is an object that listens to the `MvcEvent::EVENT_DISPATCH_ERROR` event. It is used to describe what
happens when an access to a resource is unauthorized by ZfcRbac.

ZfcRbac strategies all check if an `ZfcRbac\Exception\UnauthorizedExceptionInterface` has been thrown.

By default, ZfcRbac does not register any strategy for you. The best place to register it is in your `onBootstrap`
method of the `Module.php` class:

```php
public function onBootstrap(EventInterface $e)
{
    $t = $e->getTarget();

    $t->getEventManager()->attach(
        $t->getServiceManager()->get('ZfcRbac\View\Strategy\UnauthorizedStrategy')
    );
}
```

## Built-in strategies

ZfcRbac comes with two built-in strategies: `RedirectStrategy` and `UnauthorizedStrategy`.

### RedirectStrategy

This strategy allows to redirect any unauthorized request to another route, by optionally appending the previous
URL as a query param.

To register it, copy-paste this code in your Module.php class:

```php
public function onBootstrap(EventInterface $e)
{
    $t = $e->getTarget();

    $t->getEventManager()->attach(
        $t->getServiceManager()->get('ZfcRbac\View\Strategy\RedirectStrategy')
    );
}
```

You can configure the strategy using the `redirect_strategy` subkey:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'redirect_strategy' => [
            'redirect_when_connected'        => true,
            'redirect_to_route_connected'    => 'home',
            'redirect_to_route_disconnected' => 'login',
            'append_previous_uri'            => true,
            'previous_uri_query_key'         => 'redirectTo'
        ],
    ]
];
```

If a user tries to access to an unauthorized resource (eg.: http://www.example.com/delete), he/she will be
redirect to the "login" route if is not connected and to the "home" route otherwise (it must exists in your route config,
of course) with the previous URL appended : http://www.example.com/login?redirectTo=http://www.example.com/delete

You can prevent redirection when a user is connected (i.e. so that the user gets a 403 page) by setting `redirect_when_connected` to `false`.

### UnauthorizedStrategy

This strategy allows to render a template on any unauthorized request.

To register it, copy-paste this code in your Module.php class:

```php
public function onBootstrap(EventInterface $e)
{
    $t = $e->getTarget();

    $t->getEventManager()->attach(
        $t->getServiceManager()->get('ZfcRbac\View\Strategy\UnauthorizedStrategy')
    );
}
```

You can configure the strategy using the `unauthorized_strategy` subkey:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'unauthorized_strategy' => [
            'template' => 'error/custom-403'
        ],
    ]
];
```

> By default, ZfcRbac uses a template called `error/403`.

## Creating custom strategies

Creating a custom strategy is rather easy. Let's say we want to create a strategy that integrates with
the [ApiProblem](https://github.com/zfcampus/zf-api-problem) Zend Framework 2 module:

```php
namespace Application\View\Strategy;

use Zend\Http\Response as HttpResponse;
use Zend\Mvc\MvcEvent;
use ZF\ApiProblem\ApiProblem;
use ZF\ApiProblem\ApiProblemResponse;
use ZfcRbac\View\Strategy\AbstractStrategy;
use ZfcRbac\Exception\UnauthorizedExceptionInterface;

class ApiProblemStrategy extends AbstractStrategy
{
    public function onError(MvcEvent $event)
    {
        // Do nothing if no error or if response is not HTTP response
        if (!($exception = $event->getParam('exception') instanceof UnauthorizedExceptionInterface)
            || ($result = $event->getResult() instanceof HttpResponse)
            || !($response = $event->getResponse() instanceof HttpResponse)
        ) {
            return;
        }

        return new ApiProblemResponse(new ApiProblem($exception->getMessage()));
    }
}
```

Register your strategy:

```php
public function onBootstrap(EventInterface $e)
{
    $e->getTarget()
      ->getEventManager()
      ->attach(new ApiProblemStrategy());
}
```

### Navigation

* Continue to [the **Authorization Service**](/docs/06. Using the Authorization Service.md)
* Back to [the Guards](/docs/04. Guards.md)
* Back to [the Index](/docs/README.md)

Commit message:

Update to save into session

docs/05. Strategies.md, after:

# Strategies

In this section, you will learn:

* What are strategies
* How to use built-in strategies
* Creating custom strategies

## What are strategies?

A strategy is an object that listens to the `MvcEvent::EVENT_DISPATCH_ERROR` event. It is used to describe what
happens when an access to a resource is unauthorized by ZfcRbac.

ZfcRbac strategies all check if an `ZfcRbac\Exception\UnauthorizedExceptionInterface` has been thrown.

By default, ZfcRbac does not register any strategy for you. The best place to register it is in your `onBootstrap`
method of the `Module.php` class:

```php
public function onBootstrap(EventInterface $e)
{
    $t = $e->getTarget();

    $t->getEventManager()->attach(
        $t->getServiceManager()->get('ZfcRbac\View\Strategy\UnauthorizedStrategy')
    );
}
```

## Built-in strategies

ZfcRbac comes with two built-in strategies: `RedirectStrategy` and `UnauthorizedStrategy`.

### RedirectStrategy

This strategy allows to redirect any unauthorized request to another route, by optionally saving the previous
URL in a session container.

To register it, copy-paste this code in your Module.php class:

```php
public function onBootstrap(EventInterface $e)
{
    $t = $e->getTarget();

    $t->getEventManager()->attach(
        $t->getServiceManager()->get('ZfcRbac\View\Strategy\RedirectStrategy')
    );
}
```

You can configure the strategy using the `redirect_strategy` subkey:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'redirect_strategy' => [
            'redirect_when_connected'        => true,
            'redirect_to_route_connected'    => 'home',
            'redirect_to_route_disconnected' => 'login',
            'save_previous_uri'              => true,
            'previous_uri_session_key'       => 'redirectTo'
        ],
    ]
];
```

If a user tries to access to an unauthorized resource (eg.: http://www.example.com/delete), he/she will be
redirect to the "login" route if is not connected and to the "home" route otherwise (it must exists in your route config,
of course) with the previous URL saved into the session : http://www.example.com/login

The session container has a `zfc_rbac` name, and the URI is persisted with the key defiend in `previous_uri_session_key`
option.

> In ZfcRbac 2.4 and lower, it used to append the URI key in a query param, but for security reasons, we now save it
in session to avoid an attacker to exploit the redirect key.

You can prevent redirection when a user is connected (i.e. so that the user gets a 403 page) by setting `redirect_when_connected` to `false`.

### UnauthorizedStrategy

This strategy allows to render a template on any unauthorized request.

To register it, copy-paste this code in your Module.php class:

```php
public function onBootstrap(EventInterface $e)
{
    $t = $e->getTarget();

    $t->getEventManager()->attach(
        $t->getServiceManager()->get('ZfcRbac\View\Strategy\UnauthorizedStrategy')
    );
}
```

You can configure the strategy using the `unauthorized_strategy` subkey:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'unauthorized_strategy' => [
            'template' => 'error/custom-403'
        ],
    ]
];
```

> By default, ZfcRbac uses a template called `error/403`.

## Creating custom strategies

Creating a custom strategy is rather easy. Let's say we want to create a strategy that integrates with
the [ApiProblem](https://github.com/zfcampus/zf-api-problem) Zend Framework 2 module:

```php
namespace Application\View\Strategy;

use Zend\Http\Response as HttpResponse;
use Zend\Mvc\MvcEvent;
use ZF\ApiProblem\ApiProblem;
use ZF\ApiProblem\ApiProblemResponse;
use ZfcRbac\View\Strategy\AbstractStrategy;
use ZfcRbac\Exception\UnauthorizedExceptionInterface;

class ApiProblemStrategy extends AbstractStrategy
{
    public function onError(MvcEvent $event)
    {
        // Do nothing if no error or if response is not HTTP response
        if (!($exception = $event->getParam('exception') instanceof UnauthorizedExceptionInterface)
            || ($result = $event->getResult() instanceof HttpResponse)
            || !($response = $event->getResponse() instanceof HttpResponse)
        ) {
            return;
        }

        return new ApiProblemResponse(new ApiProblem($exception->getMessage()));
    }
}
```

Register your strategy:

```php
public function onBootstrap(EventInterface $e)
{
    $e->getTarget()
      ->getEventManager()
      ->attach(new ApiProblemStrategy());
}
```

### Navigation

* Continue to [the **Authorization Service**](/docs/06. Using the Authorization Service.md)
* Back to [the Guards](/docs/04. Guards.md)
* Back to [the Index](/docs/README.md)
